GOOGLE : HOW IT WORKS

Searching is one of the most popular activities on the internet. Search engines have become an essential part of everyone’s lives. The vast majority of searchers turn to Google when it comes to search anything on web. 
Google search is one of the most complex and convenient tools we use extensively use in our daily lives. As we know, the internet is filled with information, and not all of it is relevant to us. When we do a Google search a huge number of pages match our query, but not all of it is relevant information and it is humanly impossible to comb through all of it to find the relevant ones.
This is where Google lightens our work further. It uses a trademarked algorithm called PageRank, which assigns each Web page a relevancy score based on various factors, using which it sorts the pages in order of relevance to the search, thus making it easy for us to get the information we want.
But this is not all, there are billion searches being done each moment around the globe, to serve each search efficiently Google needs to do preprocesssing of the information present in the internet.

A Web page's PageRank depends on a few factors:
 - The frequency and location of keywords within the Web page: If the keyword appears only once within the body of a page, it will receive a low score for that keyword.
 - How long the Web page has existed: People create new Web pages every day, and not all of them stick around for long. Google places more value on pages with an established history.
 - The number of other Web pages that link to the page in question: Google looks at how many Web pages link to a particular site to determine its relevance.

Out of these three factors, the third is the most important. Because Google looks at links to a Web page as a vote, it's not easy to cheat the system. The best way to make sure your Web page is high on Google's search results is to provide great content so that other sites will link to your page. The more links your page gets, the higher its PageRank score will be. If you attract the attention of sites with a high PageRank score, your score will grow faster. Google organises the information about webpages in their seach index. The index is like a library, except it contains more info than in all the world’s libraries put together. Google uses automated programs called spiders or crawlers, just like most search engines, to help generate its search results. Google has a large index of keywords that help determine search results. These crawlers gather information from across hundreds of billions of webpages and organize it in the Search index.
The crawling process begins with a list of web addresses from past crawls and sitemaps provided by website owners. As the crawlers visit these websites, they use links on those sites to discover other pages. The software pays special attention to new sites, changes to existing sites and dead links. Computer programs determine which sites to crawl, how often and how many pages to fetch from each site.
The web is like an ever-growing library with billions of books and no central filing system. google software known as web crawlers to discover publicly available webpages. Crawlers look at webpages and follow links on those pages, much like one would if one was browsing content on the web. They go from link to link and bring data about those webpages back to Google’s servers.
rawlers find a webpage, it’s systems render the content of the page, just as a browser does. They take note of key signals — from keywords to website freshness — and  keep track of it all in the Search index.
Now when we search anything on google we are not actually searching the Interner we are searching Google’s Index of the internet. Even though there are thousands sometimes millions of webpages matching our search, this is where googles Page Rank policy comes in.
These ranking systems are made up of not one, but a whole series of algorithms. To give us the most useful information, Search algorithms look at many factors, including the words of our query, relevance and usability of pages, expertise of sources, and our location and settings. The weight applied to each factor varies depending on the nature of our query—for example, the freshness of the content plays a bigger role in answering queries about current news topics than it does about dictionary definitions.
This is how Google makes a rank list of pages and shows us desired results in decreasing order of relevance. 

History of Web browsers

A web browser is an application used to locate, view and access information on the world wide web. Today’s browsers are fully functional software suites that can interpret  
and dsiplay HTML Web pages, images, video and many other files. But the situation was in different when the web browsers were first developed. 

If we look into the history of web browsers, the first web browser called WorldWideWeb, was developed back in 1990 by Tim Berners Lee. WWW was developed for NeXT Computer and later renamed to Nexus to avoid confusion between World Wide Web and Web Browser. Nexus was a text based web browser and only way to access the web at that time. But the major issue was that the people with technical knowledge would use that only. 

Then came Lynx in 1992, again a text based browser. Then in the same year came Erwise, which was the first browser with GUI developed as a student project but discontinued in 1994. On 1993, Cello was released. It was one of the first graphical web browsers and first to run on Windows. 

The explosion in popularity of the Web was triggered by Mosaic which was a graphical browser running originally on Unix and soon ported to the Amiga and VMS platforms, and later the Apple Macintosh and Microsoft Windows platforms. It's largely credited as the first browser to truly popularise web browsing by displaying images embedded within the text. This browser bought a remarkable change in browsers’ world. Inspired by the success of Mosaic, in 1994, Netscape released its flagship Navigator.  

Released in 1995, Microsoft’s Internet Explorer made its debut. It was included as part of the Microsoft Windows operating system. It was first released as part of the add-on package Microsoft Plus! for Windows. But was released as a free download three months later. By the end of the year, the First Browser War begun. It was the period of intense competition between two famous web browsers - Netscape and Microsoft – for dominance in the usage share of web browsers. New versions of both IE and Netscape were released at a rapid  pace over the following years. The phase gave birth to many advanced features in browsing, including Netscape’s JavaScript and IE’s CSS implementation. During these releases, it was common for web designers to display 'best viewed in Netscape' or 'best viewed in Internet Explorer' logos. However, in response to this "Viewable With Any Browser" campaign was started. Finally, Microsoft ended up winning the browser wars, and IE came to dominate the market in the 1990s. Internet Explorer became the most popular web browser and attained a peak of about 95% usage share by 2003. While the Browser War going on, Opera was released, which was started as a research project in 1994 at Telenor. After two years, in 1996, Opera was first publicly released and ran only on Windows systems. Opera has originated features later adopted by other web browsers, including: Speed Dial, pop-up blocking, re-opening recently closed pages, private browsing, and tabbed browsing. It also included a bookmarks bar and a download manager. Later in 1998, in an attempt to capitalize on the emerging market for Internet-connected handheld devices, a project to port Opera to mobile device platforms was started. 

Unable to continue commercially funding their product's development, Netscape responded by open sourcing its product, creating Mozilla Project. In 2002, Mozilla launched Firefox. It was launched as a free, open-source browser, in the wake of the demise of Netscape Navigator at the hands of Internet Explorer. 

In 2003, Apple's first web browser Safari was released with Macintosh computers previously shipping with Netscape Navigator or Cyberdog. In the same year, Microsoft announced that Internet Explorer would no longer be made available as a separate product but would be part of the evolution of its Windows platform. 
In 2007, Mobile Safari was introduced as Apple’s mobile web browser and continues to dominate the iOS market. By the end of 2007, Opera Mini 4 was released to focus on the fast-growing mobile browser market. It includes the ability to view web pages similarly to a desktop based browser by introducing Overview and Zoom functions, and a landscape view setting. 

Chrome, a cross platform web browser developed by Google, was released in 2008 for Microsoft Windows, and was later ported to Linux, macOS, iOS, and Android. Now, it has taken over the browser market. Chrome allows users to synchronize their bookmarks, history, and settings across all devices with the browser installed by sending and receiving data through a chosen Google Account, which in turn updates all signed-in instances of Chrome. As a weapon in the war against Google's web dominance, Microsoft released Microsoft Edge in 2015. It was first released for Windows 10 and Xbox One in 2015, then for Android and iOS in 2017,and macOS in 2019. 
Edge includes integration with Cortana and has extensions hosted on the Microsoft Store. As of August 2019, according to StatCounter, Edge still has a lower market share than Internet Explorer. With the market share of both combined, the Microsoft browsers place second after Chrome on traditional PCs. 
From WorldWideWeb to Microsoft Edge, the world of web browsers has grown tremendously. 
 



